U.S. to Suspend Most Travel From Europe; N.B.A. Pauses After Player Gets Virus
Financial markets tumbled and Italy ordered nearly all businesses to close as the World Health Organization declared a pandemic.

Published March 11, 2020
Updated March 12, 2020, 11:19 a.m. ET

1297
[This briefing has ended. Read the latest updates on the coronavirus epidemic here.]

Video

9:31
Watch Full Video: Trump Delivers National Address on Coronavirus
President Trump addressed the nation about the steps his administration will take to combat the coronavirus crisis.CreditCredit...Doug Mills/The New York Times
President Trump says restricting travel from Europe is necessary.
President Trump announced on Wednesday night that he was taking action to stem the spread of the coronavirus by suspending most travel from Europe to the United States for 30 days, beginning on Friday. The restrictions do not apply to Britain, he said.

Mr. Trump imposed a 30-day ban on foreigners who have been in the 26 countries that make up the European Union’s Schengen Area in the previous two weeks. The limits take effect Friday at midnight and will exempt American citizens and permanent legal residents and their families, although they could be funneled to certain airports for enhanced screening.

[Update: Trump’s unilateral travel ban leaves Americans in Europe scrambling to get home.]

Later on Wednesday night, the State Department issued an advisory telling Americans to “reconsider travel” to all countries because of the global effects of the coronavirus. It is the department’s second-strongest advisory, behind “do not travel.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Speaking from the Oval Office, Mr. Trump also said health insurance companies had agreed to extend insurance coverage to cover coronavirus treatments as well as waive related co-payments.

The president added that he planned to soon announce emergency action to provide financial relief for workers who fall ill or need to be quarantined. He said he would ask Congress to take legislative action to extend that relief but did not detail what that would be. He said he would instruct the Treasury Department to “defer tax payments without interest or penalties for certain individuals and businesses negatively impacted.”

Read President Trump’s Speech on Coronavirus Pandemic: Full TranscriptMarch 11, 2020
The president, sitting behind the Resolute Desk with his arms crossed, finally appeared to be acknowledging the severity of the virus, calling it a “horrible infection” and acknowledging that Americans should cut back on travel that was not necessary.

It signaled a break from the business-as-usual attitude he had been trying to project as recently as Tuesday, when he urged Americans to “stay calm” and said the virus would soon go away. But Mr. Trump continued to anticipate a fast end date to the spread of the coronavirus, even as medical experts have warned that the pandemic will worsen.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

“This is not a financial crisis,” he said. “This is just a temporary moment in time that we will overcome as a nation and a world.”

The address capped a day when concerns about the threat of the virus seemed to reach a new pitch and measures to protect vulnerable populations began to upend regular life across the country. Many schools announced they would close indefinitely, some nursing homes banned visitors, and workplaces across the country urged their employees to work from home.

PRESIDENTIAL ADDRESSRead our full article about President Trump’s decision to suspend travel from Europe.
The N.B.A. suspends its season after a player gets the virus.
The N.B.A. will suspend its season after a Utah Jazz player was found to have tested positive for the coronavirus, the league announced on Wednesday. The league said the suspension would take effect after the completion of Wednesday’s schedule.

In Oklahoma City, a game between the Thunder and the Jazz was seconds away from starting when the Thunder’s head medical staffer sprinted onto the court to talk to referees. Players from both teams then left for their locker rooms.

“The N.B.A. will use this hiatus to determine next steps for moving forward in regard to the coronavirus pandemic,” the league said in its statement.

Earlier Wednesday, the N.C.A.A. announced that its men’s and women’s basketball tournaments — the grandest annual exhibition in U.S. college sports — will be played with “only essential staff and limited family attendance.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

“While I understand how disappointing this is for all fans of our sports, my decision is based on the current understanding of how Covid-19 is progressing in the United States,” Mark Emmert, the N.C.A.A. president, said in a statement.  
The move will allow the games to go on for the benefit of  television audiences, but in a dramatically different playing atmosphere that is certain to change the tenor of the tournaments.


Marc Stein
✔
@TheSteinLine
The NBA has suspended the season in the wake of the Coronavirus Crisis. Its official statement:

View image on Twitter
2,492
8:34 PM - Mar 11, 2020
Twitter Ads info and privacy
1,976 people are talking about this
BASKETBALL BUMMERRead our full coverage on the N.B.A.’s decision to suspend the season, and the N.C.A.A.’s decision to bar fans from March Madness.
Italy orders businesses to close, tightening its lockdown.
Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte of Italy on Wednesday ordered almost all businesses nationwide to close as infections and deaths from the new coronavirus continued to soar, two days after he announced stringent travel restrictions.

Get an informed guide to the global outbreak with our daily coronavirus newsletter.

Pharmacies, grocery stores, banks and public transit will be allowed to operate, but any other commercial enterprise that is not vital — restaurants, bars, most stores, cafes, beauty salons — must close to limit the contagion, Mr. Conte said in an evening address to the nation.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

[Analysis: Coronavirus tests Europe’s cohesion, alliances, and even democracy.]

Italy had already imposed controls unlike anything seen in a modern democracy, banning public gatherings and telling a nation of 60 million people to halt travel except for work or emergencies. But in Italy and across Europe, the epidemic has spread at a speed that has left countries scrambling to come up with containment plans.

Message Received: Italians Are Staying Home
Italy is under Europe’s first nationwide restriction on movement. “Surreal,” one citizen said.
March 10, 2020

Mr. Conte did not say when the new order would go into effect, but many businesses had already closed, either based on their own judgments or in expectation of a government decree.

“If the numbers keep going up, which is not at all improbable,” Mr. Conte said, it would mean not that new measures were needed, but that Italians should stick to those already imposed. “We must be lucid, measured, rigorous, responsible.”

The benefits of Italy’s sacrifice will not be seen for weeks, he warned.

Italy reported more than 2,300 new cases on Wednesday, driving its total to more than 12,000, with 827 deaths — the second-worst outbreak in the world, after China. Italy has more than half the cases in Europe.

Across Europe, the number of confirmed infections jumped by almost a quarter from Tuesday to Wednesday, reaching more than 22,000.

CORONAVIRUS VS. SPANISH FLU This virus is very different from the Spanish flu of 1918. Here’s how. Stocks tumble in the absence of clear planning from world leaders.
Stocks plunge as world leaders grope for an economic response.

Image
The floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Wednesday. The Dow Jones industrial average fell nearly 6 percent on Wednesday, bringing an end to an 11-year bull market.
ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

The coronavirus outbreak ended one of the longest winning streaks in the financial markets’ history on Wednesday, as major stock indexes plunged and global policymakers grappled with the growing economic crisis.

The widely followed S&P 500 was off nearly 5 percent for the day, and the Dow Jones industrial average fell nearly 6 percent, putting it more than 20 percent below its peak in February — the threshold for a bear market.

The full economic toll of the outbreak will not be clear for months. But there is mounting evidence that it will be severe.

Airlines are warning of empty planes and huge financial losses. A sharp drop in oil prices is threatening to put energy companies out of business and thousands of American drillers out of work. Supply-chain bottlenecks are forcing factories around the world to cut output, even as a slump in consumer confidence is raising doubts that there will be demand for their goods once production resumes.

Policymakers on both sides of the Atlantic appeared unwilling or unable to mount an aggressive response to the crisis. A rate cut by the Federal Reserve last week failed to calm financial markets. A similar move by the Bank of England on Wednesday was equally ineffectual.

TURMOIL IN THE MARKETS Read our live coverage on the financial fallout.
Governments in Europe were struggling to manage their budgets even before the virus struck, limiting their ability to spend heavily to keep their economies afloat. The United States was on fairly firm economic footing before the virus hit, with low unemployment and strong consumer spending — but cracks were already showing. The trade war with China hurt manufacturers and farmers, leaving the economy even more dependent on consumer spending.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

As recently as a week ago, few economists thought a recession was likely. Most thought that any damage from the virus would be brief, and that the economy would experience a sharp, “V-shaped” recovery. Forecasts have become significantly gloomier, however, as the virus has spread in the United States and as the effects around the world have become more pronounced.

Britain’s government promised nearly $39 billion in stimulus to its economy on Wednesday,  including about $6.5 billion for the country’s frayed National Health Service and other public bodies. The government’s crisis committee is scheduled to meet on Thursday to discuss social distancing strategies for tackling the virus, which could mean more people working from home, school closures and restrictions on large-scale gatherings.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel announced about $2.8 billion in spending to counter the economic fallout. Israel has imposed a mandatory 14-day isolation of anyone entering the country, abruptly choking off tourism.

BRITAIN’S PLANThe country’s aggressive economic rescue plan contrasts starkly with its muted public-health response to the coronavirus.
Tom Hanks says he and his wife have the coronavirus.
The Academy Award-winning actor Tom Hanks announced on Wednesday night that he and his wife, Rita Wilson, had tested positive for the coronavirus. Mr. Hanks, 63, is one of the most famous celebrities to contract the virus that has spread throughout the globe.

Mr. Hanks, who is in Australia to film a movie about the life of Elvis Presley, wrote that he and Ms. Wilson, also an actor, had gotten tested after feeling tired with body aches and feverish temperatures. The couple will remain isolated for as long as public health requires, Mr. Hanks wrote.

[Read: Tom Hanks got sick in Australia, where coronavirus testing is a snap.]

“Not much more to it than a one-day-at-a-time approach, no?” Mr. Hanks wrote in the statement, which was accompanied by a photograph of a lone medical glove in a hazardous waste container.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Hanks is playing the role of Colonel Tom Parker, Presley’s eccentric manager, who groomed the famous singer to stardom in the 1950s. Production on the film, which is being directed by Baz Luhrmann, is set to begin filming on Monday.

Australia has had more than 120 confirmed cases of coronavirus as of Wednesday.

FACE OF AN OUTBREAKRead our full article about Tom Hanks testing positive for the coronavirus.
New York City postpones its St. Patrick’s Day Parade.
New York City’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade, the largest such celebration in the world, was postponed on Wednesday night over concerns about the spread of the coronavirus.

The announcement, made by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, follows the cancellation of St. Patrick’s Day celebrations in Chicago and Boston. On Monday, Ireland canceled all parades nationwide.

The parade, traditionally held on March 17, draws an estimated 150,000 marchers and two million spectators a year to Fifth Avenue in Manhattan, including many police and military groups, firefighters, Irish musicians and student groups from across the United States. It is one of the city’s largest recurring public events.

TRADITIONS UPENDEDRead our full article about New York City postponing the parade.
This is a global pandemic, the W.H.O. says.

Image
Leaders of the World Health Organization declared the coronavirus outbreak a pandemic on Wednesday.
ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

The spread of the coronavirus across more than 100 countries now qualifies as a global pandemic, World Health Organization officials said on Wednesday, confirming what many epidemiologists have been saying for weeks.

Until now, the W.H.O. had avoided using the term, for fear that people would think the outbreak was unstoppable and countries would give up on trying to contain it.

“Pandemic is not a word to use lightly or carelessly,” Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, chief of the W.H.O., said at a news conference in Geneva.

“We cannot say this loudly enough or clearly enough or often enough,” he added. “All countries can still change the course of this pandemic.”

Coronavirus Map: Tracking the Spread of the Outbreak
The virus has infected more than 127,800 people in at least 111 countries.
Jan. 28, 2020

There is evidence on six continents of sustained transmission of the virus, which has infected more than 120,000 people and killed more than 4,300. The pandemic designation is largely symbolic, but public health officials know that the public will hear in the word elements of danger and risk.

According to the W.H.O., an epidemic is defined as a regional outbreak of an illness that spreads unexpectedly. In 2010, it defined a pandemic as “the worldwide spread of a new disease” that affects large numbers of people. The C.D.C. says it is “an epidemic that has spread over several countries or continents, usually affecting a large number of people.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

The last pandemic declared by the W.H.O. was in 2009, for a new strain of H1N1 influenza.

PANDEMIC DECLARED Read our full coverage of the change by the World Health Organization, and its leader’s insistence that nations keep fighting to contain the coronavirus. What’s a pandemic? Read our explanation here.
Senator’s aide has first confirmed case on Capitol Hill.
An aide working in the Washington office of Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington State, has been diagnosed with the coronavirus, according to a statement from her office, becoming the first confirmed case of the virus on Capitol Hill.

The aide, who was not identified, had been in isolation since beginning to show symptoms. The person had no known contact with the senator or any other members of Congress, according to the statement, and the senator asked for testing for any staff members who came into contact with the person and show symptoms of the virus.

Ms. Cantwell has also closed her Washington office for deep cleaning. Staff members will be working remotely.

There has been no indication that lawmakers, who are scheduled to vote on Thursday before leaving for a weeklong recess, will leave Washington earlier than planned. Democratic lawmakers are wrapping up an expansive legislative package to counter the outbreak and provide support for families affected by the virus.

Washington, Kentucky, New York and other states move toward stronger measures.

Image
Downtown Seattle on Monday. The order to reduce large gatherings is one of the strictest imposed in any American city.
In Ohio, Gov. Mike DeWine said a ban on large events was imminent. Churches and college campuses shut their doors. New York City’s St. Patrick’s Day Parade, the largest such celebration in the world, was postponed.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

And in Washington State, where the virus has hit Americans hardest, Gov. Jay Inslee said on Wednesday that people should no longer sit shoulder-to-shoulder in local bars. In the era of the coronavirus, he said, such socializing has become “just totally unacceptable.”

Governments around the country were rapidly embarking on new containment efforts on Wednesday as the number of known U.S. cases of coronavirus infection rose to more than 1,200, a day after jumping by more than one-third. People in 42 states and the District of Columbia have now tested positive for the virus, and there have been at least 37 related deaths.

Nowhere have the moves become more drastic and more urgent than in the Seattle area, where the state banned public gatherings of 250 people or more in three counties. Within hours, several local school districts with a combined enrollment of about 100,000 students said they would close for at least two weeks; a Patti Smith concert was postponed; and the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Seattle canceled all public masses, becoming the first Catholic archdiocese in the country to do so.

In San Francisco, where Mayor London N. Breed announced a ban on group events of more than 1,000 people, the San Francisco Giants announced that their exhibition game against the Oakland Athletics scheduled for March 24 would not take place at Oracle Park. Ohio’s governor said he would impose a similar ban after new evidence concluded that the virus was spreading through community transmission in the state.

“People are going to say, ‘Oh my God, really, you’re doing that?’” Governor DeWine told reporters. “You’re going to look back on it in a week and say, ‘That wasn’t a difficult decision.’”

In New York, the state and city universities and colleges, with about 700,000 students in all, will shift primarily to online classes starting on March 19, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Wednesday. Many other colleges have canceled in-person classes, and some have told students not to return after their spring breaks.

The now-canceled St. Patrick’s Day Parade in Manhattan is one of the city’s largest recurring public events, drawing roughly 150,000 marchers and two million spectators.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

RELIGIOUS CHANGESRead our full coverage of how churches throughout the country decided to cancel services this weekend.
Common questions about the coronavirus, and how to prepare.
The Times is answering some of the most common questions that readers are asking about how they can prepare for the coronavirus, how they can boost their immune systems and how they should react to the market. (Don’t, probably.)

The Market Is Moving. Most People Should Sit Still.March 9, 2020
9 Questions Parents May Have About CoronavirusMarch 9, 2020
Can I Boost My Immune System?March 10, 2020
How to Prepare for the CoronavirusMarch 1, 2020
From Pandemic to Social Distancing: A Coronavirus GlossaryMarch 11, 2020
‘It is going to get worse,’ a leading American scientist says.

Image
Disaster recovery workers preparing to clean and disinfect the Life Care Center in Kirkland, Wash., on Wednesday. The nursing home has become the center of the coronavirus outbreak in the United States.
A top federal health official gave lawmakers a stark warning on Wednesday that the coronavirus would continue to spread in the United States, and said that fans should be barred from big gatherings like National Basketball Association games.

“The bottom line: It is going to get worse,” Dr. Anthony S. Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told the House Oversight Committee.

“We would recommend that there not be large crowds,” he added. “If that means not having any people in the audience as the N.B.A. plays, so be it.”

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Dr. Fauci sought to rebut the claim — repeated often by President Trump — that the coronavirus was no worse than the flu.

“People always say, ‘Well, the flu does this, the flu does that.’ The flu has a mortality of 0.1 percent. This has a mortality of 10 times that,” Dr. Fauci said.

DR. FAUCI’S WARNINGRead our full coverage of the alarm and urgency a top health official sought to convey to lawmakers. at a House Oversight Committee meeting.
How Coronavirus Hijacks Your Cells
The intricate journey of the virus that causes Covid-19.
March 11, 2020

Labs see new supply shortages as testing demand soars.

Image
Samples awaiting virus testing at Northwell Health Labs in Lake Success, New York, on Wednesday.
A supply shortage is looming that could keep laboratories around the United States from meeting the ballooning demand for coronavirus testing.

For weeks, doctors and labs have complained that there weren’t nearly enough test kits to take samples from all the patients who showed signs of infection. That shortfall is easing after a botched rollout, but is not over.

ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Laboratories warn that they are running low on supplies used to extract viral RNA from nasal swabs — supplies that are not included in the kits.

Some lab directors have also had trouble getting the virus samples needed to validate their tests. And many are worried about a possible shortage of reagents, the chemicals used in the tests.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said this week that labs could test one swab per patient, rather than two, cutting the chemical demand in half.

Qiagen, a major manufacturer of the RNA extraction kits, said in a statement this week that it was increasing production in sites in Germany, Spain and Maryland.

The C.D.C. and the Food and Drug Administration have said they are aware of potential shortages and are monitoring supplies, but it is not clear what they might do to address the problems.

TESTING WOESThe huge demand for coronavirus tests is straining the supplies that labs need to meet that demand. And New York, which now has one of the largest clusters of coronavirus cases in the country, is also struggling with layers of frustrations.
Germany warns of worse to come.

Image
Workers assembling a coronavirus diagnosis and test center outside of the University Hospital in Mannheim, Germany, on Wednesday.
ADVERTISEMENT

Continue reading the main story

Chancellor Angela Merkel on Wednesday said that the coronavirus was likely to infect about two-thirds of the German population.

But her top medical adviser, Dr. Lothar Weiler, who appeared with her, added that, “we don’t know how fast that will happen.” One of the country’s top virologists recently said that it could take a year or two, or even longer, for that many people to become infected.

At a news conference, Ms. Merkel said: “Given a virus for which there is no immunity and no immunization, we have to understand that many people will be infected. The consensus among experts is that 60 to 70 percent of the population will be infected.”

The heart of her message was that Germans should take precautions to ensure that the health system can handle the high number of people who could fall seriously ill. She urged people to stay at home as much as possible.

“How we respond matters,” Ms. Merkel said. “We are playing for time.”

“We are at the start of a development that we cannot yet see the end of,” she told reporters in her first public appearance to address the epidemic, which has already infected more than 1,600 people in Germany. “But we as a country will do whatever is necessary to do, working within the European bloc.”

That readiness includes flexibility on spending, especially to help the small and midsize enterprises that are losing business, she said.

“We won’t ask every day, ‘What does this mean for our deficit?’” said Ms. Merkel.

Major events, including all large cultural performances in Berlin, Munich and elsewhere,  have either been canceled or will take place without spectators.

Reporting was contributed by Stephen Castle, Rick Gladstone, Farnaz Fassihi, Elisabetta Povoledo, Steven Erlanger, Henry Fountain, Alissa J. Rubin, Andrew Kramer, Joanna Berendt, Annie Karni, Marc Santora, Megan Specia, Vindu Goel, Kirk Semple, Iliana Magra, Elian Peltier, Jason Horowitz, Emma Bubola, Nicholas Bogel-Burroughs, Ivan Nechepurenko, Jorge Arangure, Elaine Yu, Amy Qin, Alan Rappeport, Emily Cochrane, Sheri Fink, Mike Baker, Monika Pronczuk, Joanna Berendt, Benjamin Novak, Benjamin Mueller, Melissa Eddy, Roni Caryn Rabin, Donald G. McNeil Jr., Andrew Keh, Isabel Kershner, Katie Thomas, Nicole Sperling, Scott Cacciola and Sopan Deb.

The Coronavirus Crisis
Stocks Plunge, With Dow in Bear Market: Live UpdatesMarch 11, 2020

Message Received: Italians Are Staying HomeMarch 10, 2020

Talks Begin on Stimulus Plan as Trump Plays Down Virus ThreatMarch 10, 2020

Sanders and Biden Cancel Events as Coronavirus Fears Upend PrimaryMarch 10, 2020

What Pregnant Women Should Know About CoronavirusMarch 3, 2020

Coachella, Influential Music Festival, Is Postponed Amid Virus FearsMarch 10, 2020

Xi Goes to Wuhan, Coronavirus Epicenter, in Show of ConfidenceMarch 10, 2020

‘Proselytizing Robots’: Inside South Korean Church at Outbreak’s CenterMarch 10, 2020
